XIII.
The pirate crew set sail.
Tom's mind was made up now. He was gloomy and desperate. He was a
forsaken, friendless boy, he said. Nobody loved him. When they found
out what they had driven him to, perhaps they would be sorry. He had
tried to do right and get along, but they would not let him. Since
nothing would do them but to get rid of him, let it be so. And let them
blame him for the consequences. Why shouldn't they? What right had the
friendless to complain? Yes, they had forced him to it at last. He would
lead a life of crime. There was no choice. By this time he was far down
Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to take up tingled faintly upon his
ear. He sobbed, now, to think he should never, never hear that old
familiar sound any more. It was very hard, but it was forced on him.
Since he was driven out into the cold world, he must submit. But he
forgave them.
Then the sobs came thick and fast. Just at this point he met his soul's
sworn comrade, Joe Harper, hard-eyed and with evidently a great and
heart. Plainly, here were two souls with but a single thought. Tom, wiping
his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a
resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by
roaming abroad into the great world never to return, and ended by hoping
that Joe would not forget him.
But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going
to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that purpose. His mother
had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and
knew nothing about. It was plain that she was tired of him and wished
him to go. If she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but
succumb. He hoped she would be happy, and never regret having driven
her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die.
As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to
stand by each other and be brothers, and never separate till death
relieved them of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans.
Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and
dying, some time, of cold and want and grief. But after listening to
Tom, he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a
life of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate. Three miles below St.
Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi River was a trifle over a
There was a long, narrow, wooded island, with a shallow bar at the head
of it, and this offered well as a rendezvous. It was not inhabited, it
lay far over towards the further shore, abreast a dense and almost
wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson's island was chosen. Who were to be
the subjects of their piracies was a matter that did not occur to them.
Then they hunted up Huckleberry Finn, and he joined them promptly for
careers were won to him. He was indifferent. They presently separated to
meet at a lonely spot on the river bank, two miles above the village, at
the favorite hour, which was midnight. There was a small log raft there
which they meant to capture. Each would bring hooks and lines, and such
provision as he could steal in the most dark and mysterious way, as
became outlaws. And before the afternoon was done, they had all managed
to enjoy the sweet glory of spreading the fact that pretty soon the town
would hear something. All who got this vague hint were cautioned to be
mum and wait.
About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles, and
stopped in a dense undergrowth, on a small bluff overlooking the meeting
place. It was starlight and very still. The mighty river lay like an
ocean at rest. Tom listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the quiet.
Then he gave a low, distinct whistle. It was answered from under the
twice more. These signals were answered in the same way. Then a guarded
voice said,
"'Who goes there?'
"'Tom Sawyer, the black avenger of the Spanish main. Name your names!'
"'Huck Finn, the red-handed, and Joe Harper, the terror of the seas!'
Tom had furnished these titles from his favorite literature. "'Tis well.
Give the countersign.' Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word
simultaneously to the brooding night.
"'Blood!'
Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it,
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was
an easy, comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it lacked
the advantages of difficulty in danger so valued by a pirate. The
terror of the seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn
himself out with getting it there. Finn, the red-handed, had stolen a
skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought
a few corn cobs to make pipes with. But none of the pirates smoked or
chewed but himself. The black avenger of the Spanish main said it would
never do to start without some fire. That was a wise thought. Matches
were hardly known there in that day. They saw a fire smoldering upon a
great raft a hundred yards above, and they went stealthily thither and
helped themselves to a chunk. They made an imposing adventure of it,
saying, "'Hist!' every now and then, and suddenly halting with finger on
lip, moving with hands on imaginary dagger-hilts, and giving orders in
dismal whispers that, if the foe stirred, to, let him have it to the
hilt, because dead men tell no tales. They knew well enough that the
Rouse men were all down at the village laying in stores or having a
spree, but still that was no excuse for their conducting this thing in
unparadical way.
They shoved off presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar, and
Joe at the forward. Tom stood amidst ships gloomy-browed and with folded
arms, and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper,
"'Luff, and bring her to the wind!'
"'Ay, ay, sir!'
"'Steady, steady!'
"'Steady it is, sir.'
"'Let her go off a point.'
"'Point it is, sir.'
As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward mid-stream,
it was no doubt understood that these orders were given only for style,
and were not intended to mean anything in particular.
"'What sails she carrying?'
"'Courses, top sails, and flying jib, sir.'
"'Send the riles up. Lay out a loft there. Half a dozen a year. For top
manstel, sir. Lively now.'
"'Ay, ay, sir.'
"'Shake out that main to Galan, sir. Sheets and braces. Now, my hearties.'
"'Heel him a lee. Hire to port. Stand by to meet her when she comes.
Port, port, now, men. With a will. Steady. Steady it is, sir.'
The raft drew beyond the middle of the river. The boys pointed her head
right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so there was
not more than a two- or three-mile current. Hardly a word was said during
the next three-quarters of an hour. Now the raft was passing before the
summering light showed where it lay, peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague
vast sweep of a star-gemmed water, unconscious of the tremendous event
that was happening. The Black Avenger stood still with folded arms,
looking his last upon the scene of his former joys and his later
sufferings, and wishing she could see him now, abroad on the wild sea,
facing peril and death with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a
small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson the Island beyond
eye-shot of the village, and so he looked his last with a broken and
satisfied heart. The other pirates were looking their last, too, and
they all looked so long that they came near letting the current drift
them out of the range of the island, but they discovered the danger in
time and made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in the morning the
raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the head of the
island, and they waited back and forth until they had landed their
freight. Part of the little raft's belongings consisted of an old sail,
and this they spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shelter
their provisions, but they themselves would sleep in the open air in
good weather, as became outlaws. They built a fire against the side of
a great log twenty or thirty steps within the somber depths of the
forest, and then cooked some bacon in the frying-pan for supper, and
used up half of the corn-pone stock they had brought. It seemed glorious
sport to be feasting in that wild freeway in the virgin forest of an
unexplored and uninhabited island, far from the haunts of men, and they
said they never would return to civilization. The climbing fire lit up
their faces and threw its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of
their forest temple, and upon the varnished foliage and festooning
vines. When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last
allowance of corn-pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out in the
grass, filled with contentment. They could have found a cooler place,
but they would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the
roasting camp-fire.
"'Ain't it gay?' said Joe.
"'It's nuts,' said Tom. What would the boys say if they could see us?'
"'Say? Well, they'd just die to be here. Hey, Hucky!'
"'I reckon so,' said Huckleberry. Anyways, I'm suited. I don't want
enough to eat, generally, and here they can't come and pick at a
feller and bully-rag him so.'
"'It's just the life for me,' said Tom. You don't have to get up,
mornings, and you don't have to go to school and wash and all that
blame-foolishness. You see, a pirate don't have to do anything, Joe,
when he's ashore, but a hermit. He has to be a praying considerable,
and then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself that way.'
"'Oh, yes, that's so,' said Joe. But I hadn't thought much about it,
I had a good deal rather be a pirate, now that I've tried it.'
"'You see,' said Tom, people don't go much on hermits nowadays,
like they used to in the old times. But a pirate's always respected,
and a hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put
sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and what
does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for?' inquired Huck.
"'I don't know, but they's got to do it. Hermits always do. You'd have
to do that if he was a hermit.'
"'Durned if I would,' said Huck.
"'Well, what would you do?'
"'I don't know, but I wouldn't do that.'
"'Why, Huck, you'd have to. How'd you get around it?'
"'Why, I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away.'
"'Run away? Well, you would be a nice old slouch of a hermit. You'd be
a disgrace.' The red-handed made no response, being better employed. He
had finished gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed-stem to it,
loaded it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and
blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke. He was in the full bloom of luxurious
contentment. The other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and
secretly resolved to acquire it shortly. Presently, Huck said,
"'What does pirates have to do?'
Tom said, "'Oh, they have just a bully time. Take ships and burn them,
and get the money and bury it in awful places in their island, where
there's ghosts and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships,
and make them walk a plank.'
"'And they carry the women to the island,' said Joe.
"'They don't kill the women.'
"'No,' assented Tom. They don't kill the women. They're too noble,
and the women's always beautiful, too.'
"'And don't they wear the bulliest clothes? Oh, no. All gold and silver
and diamonds,' said Joe, with enthusiasm.
"'Who?' said Chuck.
"'Why, the pirates.'
Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.
"'I reckon I ain't dressed fitting for a pirate,' said he, with a
regretful pathos in his voice.
"'But I ain't got none but these.'
But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough
after they should have begun their adventures. They made him
understand that his poor rags would do to begin with, though it was
customary for wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe.
Gradually their talk died out, and drowsiness began to steal upon the
eyelids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fingers of the
red-handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the
black avenger of the Spanish main had more difficulty in getting to
sleep. They said their prayers inwardly and lying down, since there
was nobody there with authority to make them kneel and recite aloud.
In truth they had a mind not to say them at all, but they were afraid
to proceed to such lengths at that, lest they might call down a sudden
and special thunderbolt from heaven. Then at once they reached and
hovered upon the imminent verge of sleep. But an intruder came now that
would not down. It was conscience. They began to feel a vague fear that
they had been doing wrong to run away, and next they thought of the
stolen meat, and then the real torture came. They tried to argue it
away by reminding conscience that they had purloined sweetmeats and
apple-scores at times, but conscience was not to be appeased by such
thin plausibilities. It seemed to them in the end that there was no
getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats was only
cooking, while taking bacon and hams and such valuables was plain simple
stealing—and there was a command against that in the Bible. So they
inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business, their
piracies should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing. Then
conscience granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent pirates
fell peacefully to sleep.
CHAPTER XIV HAPPY CAMP OF THE FREE BOOTERS
When Tom awoke in the morning he wondered where he was. He sat up and
rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he comprehended. It was the
cool, grey dawn, and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in
the deep, pervading calm and silence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred,
not a sound obtruded upon great nature's meditation. Beaded dewdrops
melted upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes covered the
fire, and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air. Joe
and Huck still slept. Now, far away in the woods, a bird called. Another
answered. Presently the hammering of a Whitpecker was heard. Gradually
the cool, dim grey of the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds
multiplied and life manifested itself. The marvel of nature, shaking off
sleep and going to work, unfolded itself to the musing boy. A little
green worm came crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his
body into the air from time to time, and sniffing around, then proceeding
again. For he was measuring, Tom said, and when the worm approached him
of its own accord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and
falling by turns, as the creature still came toward him, or seemed
inclined to go elsewhere.
And when at last it considered a painful moment with its curved body in
the air, and then came decisively down upon Tom's leg, and began
journeying over him, his whole heart was glad, for that meant that he
was going to have a new suit of clothes, without the shadow of a doubt
a gaudy, piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared, from
nowhere in particular, and went about their labours. One struggled
manfully by, with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its
arms, and lugged it straight up a tree trunk. A brown-spotted ladybug
climbed a dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to it
and said,
"'Ladybug, ladybug, fly away home! Your house is on fire, your children's
alone!' And she took wing and went off to see about it. Which did not
surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was credulous
about conflagrations, and he had practised upon its simplicity more
than once. A tumble-bug came next, heaving sturdily at its ball, and
Tom touched the creature to see it shut its legs against its body and
pretend to be dead. The birds were fairly rioting by this time. A cat
bird, the northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head, and trilled
out imitations of her neighbours in a rapture of enjoyment. Then a
jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig almost
within the boy's reach. Cocked his head to one side and eyed the
strangers with a consuming curiosity. A grey squirrel and a big fellow
of the fox-kind came scurrying along, sitting up at intervals to inspect
and chatter at the boys, for the wild things had probably never seen a
human being before, and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not. All
nature was wide awake and stirring now. Long lances of sunlight pierced
down through the dense foliage far and near, and a few butterflies came
fluttering upon the scene. Tom stirred up the other pirates, and they
all clattered away with a shout, and in a minute or two were stripped
and chasing after and tumbling over each other in the shallow, limpid
water of the white sandbar. They felt no longing for the little village
sleeping in the distance, beyond the majestic waste of water. A vagrant
current, or a slight rise in the river, had carried off their raft, but
this only gratified them since its going was something like burning the
bridge between them and civilization. They came back to camp wonderfully
refreshed, glad-hearted, and ravenous, and they soon had the campfire
blazing up again. Huck found a spring of clear cold water close by, and
the boys made cups of broad oak or hickory leaves, and felt that water,
sweetened with such a wildwood charm as that, would be a good enough
substitute for coffee.
While Joe was slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to
hold on a minute. They stepped to a promising nook in the river bank
and threw in their lines. Almost immediately they had reward. Joe had
not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some
handsome bass, a couple of sun-perch, and a small catfish—provisions
enough for quite a family. They fried the fish with the bacon, and were
astonished, for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before. They did
not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after it is
caught the better he is, and they reflected little upon what a sauce
open-air sleeping, open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of
hunger makes, too. They lay around in the shade after breakfast while
Huck had a smoke, and then went off through the woods on an exploring
expedition. They trapped gaily along over decaying logs, through tangled
underbrush, among solemn monarchs of the forest, hung from their crowns
to the ground, with a drooping regalia of grape vines. Now and then they
came upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers. They
found plenty of things to be delighted with, but nothing to be astonished
at. They discovered that the island was about three miles long and a
quarter of a mile wide, and that the shore it lay it closest to was only
separated from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards wide. They
took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the middle of the
afternoon when they got back to the camp. They were too hungry to stop to
fish, but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham, and then threw themselves
down in the shade to talk. But the talk soon began to drag, and then died.
The stillness, the solemnity that brooded in the woods, and the sense of
loneliness, began to tell upon the spirits of the boys. They fell to
thinking. A sort of undefined longing crept upon them. This took dim
shape presently. It was budding homesickness. Even Finn, the red-handed,
was dreaming of his doorsteps and empty hogs' heads. But they were all
ashamed of their weakness, and none was brave enough to speak his
thought. For some time now the boys had been dully conscious of a
particular sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the
ticking of a clock which he takes no distinct note of. But now this
mysterious sound became more pronounced, and forced a recognition. The
boys started, glanced at each other, and then each assumed a listening
attitude. There was a long silence, profound and unbroken, and then a
deep sullen boom came floating down out of the distance.
"'What is it?' exclaimed Joe, under his breath.
"'I wonder,' said Tom, in a whisper.
"'Taint thunder,' said Elkleberry, in an odd tone. "'Cause thunder—'
Hark!' said Tom. Listen, don't talk."
They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same muffled boom
troubled the solemn hush.
"'Let's go and see.' They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore
toward the town. They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over
the water. The little steam ferry-boat was about a mile below the
village, drifting with a current. Her broad deck seemed crowded with
people. There was a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with a
stream in the neighborhood of the ferry-boat, but the boys could not
determine what the men in them were doing. Presently a great jet of
white smoke burst from the ferry-boat's side, and as it expanded and
rose in a lazy cloud, that same dull throb of sound was borne to the
listeners again.
"'I know now,' exclaimed Tom. "'Somebody's drowned.'
"'That's it,' said Huck. They'd done that last summer when Bill Turner
got drowned. They shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him
come up to the top. Yes, and they take loads of bread and put quick
silver in them and set them afloat. And wherever there's anybody that's
drowned, they'll float right there and stop.'
"'Yes, I've heard about that,' said Joe. I wonder what makes the bread
do that.'
"'Oh, it ain't the bread so much,' said Tom. I reckon it's mostly what
they say over it before they start it out.'
"'But they don't say anything over it,' said Huck. I've seen them and
they don't.'
"'Well, that's funny,' said Tom. But maybe they say it to themselves.
Of course they do. Anybody might know that.'
The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because
an ignorant lump of bread uninstructed by an incantation could not be
expected to act very intelligently when sent upon an errand of such
gravity.
"'By jings, I wish I was over there now,' said Joe.
"'I do too,' said Huck. I'd give heaps to know who it is.'
The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought
flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed,
"'Boys! I know who's drowned! It's us!'
They felt like heroes in an instant. Here was a gorgeous triumph. They
were missed. They were mourned. Hearts were breaking on their account.
Tears were being shed. Accusing memories of unkindness to these poor
lost lads were rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were
being indulged. And best of all, the departed were the talk of the whole
town, and the envy of all the boys, as far as this dazzling notoriety
was concerned. This was fine. It was worth while to be a pirate after
all.'
As twilight drew on, the ferry-boat went back to her accustomed business,
and the skiffs disappeared. The pirates returned to camp. They were
jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble
they were making. They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it, and then
fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying about them.
And the pictures they drew of the public distress on their account were
gratifying to look upon, from their point of view. But when the shadows
of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to talk, and sat gazing
at the fire, with their minds evidently wandering elsewhere. The
excitement was gone now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts
of certain persons at home who were not enjoying this fine frolic as
much as they were. Misgivings came. They grew troubled and unhappy. A
sigh or two escaped unawares. By and by Joe timidly ventured upon a
roundabout feeler as to how the others might look upon a return to
civilization. Not right now, but—
Tom withered him with derision. Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined
in with Tom, and the waverer quickly explained, and was glad to get out
of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted homesickness
clinging to his garments as he could. Mutiny was effectually laid to rest
for the moment. As the night deepened, Huck began to nod and presently to
snore. Joe followed next. Tom lay upon his elbow motionless for some time
watching the two intently. At last he got up cautiously on his knees
and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung
by the campfire. He picked up and inspected several large semi-cylinders
of the thin white bark of a sycamore, and finally chose two which seemed
to suit him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something
upon each of these with his red keel. One he rolled up and put in his
jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and removed it to a
little distance from the owner. And he also put into the hat certain
school-boy treasures of almost inestimable value, among them a lump of
chalk, an India rubber ball, three fish-hooks, and one of that kind of
marbles known as the—sure enough—crystal. Then he tiptoed his way
cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing, and
straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sand-bar.
CHAPTER XV Tom's Stealthy Visit Home
A few minutes later Tom was in the shoal-water of the bar, wading toward
the Illinois shore. Before the depth reached his middle he was halfway
over. The current would permit no more wading now, so he struck out
confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards. He swam quartering
upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he had
expected. However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along till
he found a low place and drew himself out. He put his hand on his jacket
pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through the woods
following the shore with streaming garments. Shortly before ten o'clock
he came out into an open place opposite the village, and saw the
ferry-boat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank. Everything
was quiet under the blinking stars. He crept down the bank, watching with
all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four strokes, and
climbed into the skiff that did yawl-duty at the boat's stern. He laid
himself down under the thwarps and waited, panting. Presently the
cracked bell tapped, and a voice gave the order to cast off. A minute or
two later the skiff's head was standing high up, against the boat's
swell, and the voyage was begun. Tom felt happy in his success, for he
knew it was the boat's last trip for the night. At the end of a long
twelve or fifteen minutes the wheel stopped, and Tom slipped overboard
and swam ashore in the dusk, landing fifty yards downstream, out of
danger of possible stragglers. He flew along unfrequented alleys, and
shortly found himself at his aunt's back fence. He climbed over,
approached the El, and looked in at the sitting-room window, for a light
was burning there. There sat Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's
mother grouped together, talking. They were by the bed, and the bed was
between them and the door. Tom went to the door, and began to softly
lift the latch. Then he pressed gently, and the door yielded a crack. He
continued pushing, cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked, till
he judged he might squeeze through on his knees. So he put his head
through, and began whirly.
"'What makes the candles blow so?' said Aunt Polly. Tom hurried up.
"'Why, that door's open, I believe. Why, of course it is. No end of
Tom disappeared under the bed just in time. He lay and breathed himself
for a while, then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt's foot.
"'But as I was saying,' said Aunt Polly, "'he warn't bad, so to say,
only mischievous, only just giddy and harem-scarum, you know. You warn't
any more responsible than a colt. He never meant any harm, and he was
the best-hearted boy that ever was.' And she began to cry. It was just
so with my Joe, always full of his devilment and up to every kind of
mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he could be. And
laws bless me to think I went and whipped him for taking that cream,
never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself because it was
sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never, never, never,
poor abused boy.' And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart would break.
"'I hope Tom's better off where he is,' said Sid. But if he'd been
better in some ways—Sid!' Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye,
though he could not see it. Not a word against my Tom, now that he's
gone. God'll take care of him. Never you trouble yourself, sir. Oh,
Mrs. Harper, I don't know how to give him up. I don't know how to give
him up. He was such a comfort to me, although he tormented my old heart
out of me, most. The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed
be the name of the Lord. But it's so hard, oh, it's so hard. Only last
Saturday my Joe busted a firecracker right under my nose, and I knocked
him sprawling. Little did I know then how soon—oh, if it was to do
over again, I'd hug him and bless him for it.'
"'Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper. I know just
exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon my Tom took and
filled the cat full of painkiller. And I did think the creature would
tear the house down. And, God forgive me, I cracked Tom's head with my
thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy. But he's out of all his troubles now,
and the last words I ever heard him say was to reproach. But this
memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely down. Tom
was snuffling now himself, and more in pity of himself than anybody
else. He could hear Mary crying and putting in a kindly word for him
from time to time. He began to have a nobler opinion of himself than
ever before. Still, he was sufficiently touched by his aunt's grief to
long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with joy, and the
theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to his nature,
too. But he resisted, and lay still. He went on listening, and gathered
by odds and ends that it was conjectured at first that the boys had
drowned while taking a swim. Then the small raft had been missed. Next
certain boys said the missing lads had promised that the village should
hear something soon. The wise heads had put this and that together, and
decided that the lads had gone off on that raft, and would turn up at
the next town below presently. But toward noon the raft had been found,
lodged against the Missouri shore some five or six miles below the
village, and then hope perished. They must be drowned, else hunger would
have driven them home by nightfall if not sooner. It was believed that
the search for the bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because
the drowning must have occurred in mid-channel, since the boys, being
good swimmers, would otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday
night. If the bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be
given over, and the funerals would be preached on that morning. Tom
shuddered. Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good night and turned to go. Then,
with a mutual impulse, the two bereaved women flung themselves into each
other's arms, and had a good consoling cry, and then parted. Aunt Polly
was tender far beyond her want. In her good night to Sid and Mary, Sid
snuffled a bit, and Mary went off crying with all her heart. Aunt Polly
knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly, and with
such measureless love in her words and her old trembling voice, that he
was weltering in tears again long before she was through. He had to keep
still long after she went to bed, for she kept making broken-hearted
ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully and turning over, but
alas, she was still only moaning a little in her sleep.
Now the boy stole out, rose gradually from the bedside, shaded the candle
light with his hand, and stood regarding her. His heart was full of
pity for her. He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the
candle, but something occurred to him, and he lingered considering. His
face lighted with a happy solution of his thought. He put the bark
hastily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and
straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him. He
threaded his way back to the fairy landing, found nobody at large there,
and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was tenantless
except that there was a watchman who always turned in and slept like a
slave in image. He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped into it, and
was soon rowing cautiously up-stream. When he had pulled a mile above
the village, he started quartering across and bent himself stoutly to
his work. He hit the landing on the other side neatly, for this was a
familiar bit of work for him. He was moved to capture the skiff, arguing
that it might be considered a ship and therefore a legitimate prey for a
pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be made for it, and that
might end in revelations. So he stepped ashore and entered the wood. He
sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meantime to keep awake,
and then started warily down the home stretch. The night was far spent,
it was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the
highland bar. He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the
great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A
little later he paused, dripping upon the threshold of the camp, and
heard Joe say,--"No,
Tom's true blue, Huck. He'll come back. He won't desert. He knows that would be
a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for that sort of thing.
He's up to something or other."--"I wonder
what?"--"Well,
the things is ours, anyway, ain't they?"--"Pretty
near, but not yet, Huck. The writing says they are if he ain't back here to breakfast."--"Which
he is!" exclaimed
Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping
grandly into camp. A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was
shortly provided, and as the boys set to work upon it Tom recounted,
and adorned, his adventures. They were a vain and boastful company of
heroes when the tale was done. Then Tom hid himself away in a shady
nook to sleep till noon, and the other pirates got ready to fish and
explore.